docs/user/Embedding-Build-Tools.md, before:

---
layout: docs
toc_group: python
link_title: Embedding Build Tools
permalink: /reference-manual/python/Embedding-Build-Tools/
---

# Embedding Build Tools

The GraalPy **Maven** and **Gradle** plugins provide functionality to manage Python related resources
required for embedding Python code in Java-based applications:
- *Python application files* provided by the user, for example, Python sources which are part of the project.
- *Third-party Python packages* installed by the plugin during the build according to the plugin configuration.
- *The Python standard library*, which is necessary to make Native Image generated executables self-contained.

Apart from physically managing and deploying those files, it is also necessary to make them available in Python at runtime by configuring the **GraalPy Context** in your Java code accordingly. 
The [GraalPyResources](https://github.com/oracle/graalpython/blob/master/graalpython/org.graalvm.python.embedding/src/org/graalvm/python/embedding/utils/GraalPyResources.java) API provides factory methods to create a Context preconfigured for accessing Python, embedding relevant resources with a **Virtual Filesystem** or from a dedicated **external directory**.

## Deployment

There are two modes how to deploy the resources: as Java resources using the Virtual Filesystem to access them in Python, or as an external directory.

### Virtual Filesystem

The Python related resources are embedded in the application file, either in JAR or Native Image generated
executable, as standard Java resources. 
The GraalPy Virtual Filesystem accesses resource files as standard Java resources and makes them available to Python code running in GraalPy.
This is transparent to the Python code, which can use standard Python IO to access those files.

Java resource files in a Maven or Gradle project are typically located in dedicated resources directories.
All resources subdirectories named _org.graalvm.python.vfs_ are merged and mapped to a configurable Virtual Filesystem mount point at the Python side, by default `/graalpy_vfs`. 
For example, a Python file with the real filesystem path `${project_resources_directory}/org.graalvm.python.vfs/src/foo/bar.py` will be accessible as `/graalpy_vfs/src/foo/bar.py` in Python.

Use the following [GraalPyResources](https://github.com/oracle/graalpython/blob/master/graalpython/org.graalvm.python.embedding/src/org/graalvm/python/embedding/utils/GraalPyResources.java)
factory methods to create GraalPy Context preconfigured for the use of the Virtual Filesystem:
* `GraalPyResources.createContext()`
* `GraalPyResources.contextBuilder()`
* `GraalPyResources.contextBuilder(VirtualFileSystem)`

### External Directory

As an alternative to Java resources with the Virtual Filesystem, it is also possible to configure the Maven or Gradle plugin to manage the contents of an external directory, which will **not be embedded** as a Java resource into the resulting application. 
A user is then responsible for the deployment of such directory. 
Python code will access the files directly from the real filesystem.

Use the following [GraalPyResources](https://github.com/oracle/graalpython/blob/master/graalpython/org.graalvm.python.embedding/src/org/graalvm/python/embedding/utils/GraalPyResources.java) factory methods to create GraalPy Context preconfigured for the use of an external directory:
* `GraalPyResources.createContextBuilder(Path)`

## Conventions

The factory methods in [GraalPyResources](https://github.com/oracle/graalpython/blob/master/graalpython/org.graalvm.python.embedding/src/org/graalvm/python/embedding/utils/GraalPyResources.java) rely on the following conventions, where the `${root}` is either an external directory, or a Virtual System mount point on the Python side and `${project_resources_directory}/org.graalvm.python.vfs` on the real filesystem:
- `${root}/src`: used for Python application files. This directory will be configured as the default search path for Python module files (equivalent to `PYTHONPATH` environment variable).
- `${root}/venv`: used for the Python virtual environment holding installed third-party Python packages. 
The Context will be configured as if it is executed from this virtual environment. Notably packages installed in this
virtual environment will be automatically available for importing.
- `${root}/home`: used for the Python standard library (equivalent to `PYTHONHOME` environment variable).

The Maven or Gradle plugin will fully manage the contents of the `venv` and `home` subdirectories.
Any manual changes in these directories will be overridden by the plugin during the build.
- `${root}/venv`: the plugin creates a virtual environment and installs required packages according to the plugin configuration in _pom.xml_ or _build.gradle_.
- `${root}/home`: the plugin copies the required (also configurable) parts of the Python standard library into this directory.
By default, the full standard library is used.

The _src_ subdirectory is left to be manually populated by the user with custom Python scripts or modules.

## GraalPy Maven Plugin Configuration

Add the plugin configuration in the `configuration` block of `graalpy-maven-plugin` in the _pom.xml_ file:
```xml
<plugin>
    <groupId>org.graalvm.python</groupId>
    <artifactId>graalpy-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    ...
    <configuration>
        ...
    </configuration>
    ...
</plugin>
```
The **packages** element declares a list of third-party Python packages to be downloaded and installed by the plugin.
- The Python packages and their versions are specified as if used with `pip`:
  ```xml
  <configuration>
      <packages>
          <package>termcolor==2.2</package>
          ...
      </packages>
      ...
  </configuration>
  ```
- The **pythonHome** subsection declares what parts of the standard library should be deployed.

  Each `include` and `exclude` element is interpreted as a Java-like regular expression specifying which file paths should be included or excluded.
  ```xml
  <configuration>
      <pythonHome>
          <includes>
              <include>.*</include>
              ...
          </includes>
          <excludes>
              <exclude></exclude>
              ...
          </excludes>
      </pythonHome>
      ...
  </configuration>
  ```
- If the **pythonResourcesDirectory** element is specified, then the given directory is used as an [external directory](#external-directory) and no Java resources are embedded.
Remember to use the appropriate `GraalPyResources` API to create the Context.
  ```xml
  <configuration>
      <pythonResourcesDirectory>${basedir}/python-resources</pythonResourcesDirectory>
      ...
  </configuration>
  ```

## GraalPy Gradle Plugin Configuration

> Note: GraalPy Gradle Plugin will become available as of GraalPy version 24.1.1, planned for October 15, 2024.

Add the plugin configuration in the `GraalPy` block in the _build.gradle_ file.
The **packages** element declares a list of third-party Python packages to be downloaded and installed by the plugin.
- The Python packages and their versions are specified as if used with `pip`.
  ```
  graalPy {
    packages = ["termcolor==2.2"]
    ...
  }
  ```
- The **pythonHome** subsection declares what parts of the standard library should be deployed.

  Each element in the `includes` and `excludes` list is interpreted as a Java-like regular expression specifying which file paths should be included or excluded.
  ```
  graalPy {
    pythonHome {
      includes = [".*"]
      excludes = []
    }
    ...
  }
  ```
- If the **pythonResourcesDirectory** element is specified, then the given directory is used as an [external directory](#external-directory) and no Java resources are embedded. 
Remember to use the appropriate `GraalPyResources` API to create the Context.
  ```
  graalPy {
    pythonResourcesDirectory = file("$rootDir/python-resources")
    ...
  }
  ```

### Related Documentation

* [Embedding Graal languages in Java](https://www.graalvm.org/reference-manual/embed-languages/)
* [Permissions for Python Embeddings](Embedding-Permissions.md)

Commit message:

Polish GraalPy Gradle plugin
Fixes the GraalPy Gradle plugin to make it more robust:

- it fixes up-to-date checking by making sure that all tasks
declare their inputs and outputs
- it fixes overlapping outputs which would cause tasks to be
always out of date (each task should use a distinct output directory)
- it fixes eager configuration of the project caused by dependency
resolution
- it fixes the scope of some dependencies which should be runtime
only
- it fixes how tasks are wired in resource processing, by using
a source set dependency instead of adding explicit task dependencies
- filelist is generated only when external resources directory
is not specified
- checkstyle and eclipseformat on the sources (not integrated in mx yet)

New features:

- introduce a `community` boolean property (default: false) to configure
which GraalPy Maven artifact to inject
- the version of the injected GraalPy Maven artifacts is always the same
as the version of the GraalPy Gradle plugin

Implementation:

- introduces new MX project type: GradlePluginProject, which uses Gradle
to build the plugin jars and also invokes validatePlugins as part of
mx build. The Gradle build script as well as the plugin properties
file are generated by GradlePluginProject during the build.

- GradlePluginProject downloads Gradle if not available

docs/user/Embedding-Build-Tools.md, after:

---
layout: docs
toc_group: python
link_title: Embedding Build Tools
permalink: /reference-manual/python/Embedding-Build-Tools/
---

# Embedding Build Tools

The GraalPy **Maven** and **Gradle** plugins provide functionality to manage Python related resources
required for embedding Python code in Java-based applications:
- *Python application files* provided by the user, for example, Python sources which are part of the project.
- *Third-party Python packages* installed by the plugin during the build according to the plugin configuration.
- *The Python standard library*, which is necessary to make Native Image generated executables self-contained.

Apart from physically managing and deploying those files, it is also necessary to make them available in Python at runtime by configuring the **GraalPy Context** in your Java code accordingly. 
The [GraalPyResources](https://github.com/oracle/graalpython/blob/master/graalpython/org.graalvm.python.embedding/src/org/graalvm/python/embedding/utils/GraalPyResources.java) API provides factory methods to create a Context preconfigured for accessing Python, embedding relevant resources with a **Virtual Filesystem** or from a dedicated **external directory**.

## Deployment

There are two modes how to deploy the resources: as Java resources using the Virtual Filesystem to access them in Python, or as an external directory.

### Virtual Filesystem

The Python related resources are embedded in the application file, either in JAR or Native Image generated
executable, as standard Java resources. 
The GraalPy Virtual Filesystem accesses resource files as standard Java resources and makes them available to Python code running in GraalPy.
This is transparent to the Python code, which can use standard Python IO to access those files.

Java resource files in a Maven or Gradle project are typically located in dedicated resources directories.
All resources subdirectories named _org.graalvm.python.vfs_ are merged and mapped to a configurable Virtual Filesystem mount point at the Python side, by default `/graalpy_vfs`. 
For example, a Python file with the real filesystem path `${project_resources_directory}/org.graalvm.python.vfs/src/foo/bar.py` will be accessible as `/graalpy_vfs/src/foo/bar.py` in Python.

Use the following [GraalPyResources](https://github.com/oracle/graalpython/blob/master/graalpython/org.graalvm.python.embedding/src/org/graalvm/python/embedding/utils/GraalPyResources.java)
factory methods to create GraalPy Context preconfigured for the use of the Virtual Filesystem:
* `GraalPyResources.createContext()`
* `GraalPyResources.contextBuilder()`
* `GraalPyResources.contextBuilder(VirtualFileSystem)`

### External Directory

As an alternative to Java resources with the Virtual Filesystem, it is also possible to configure the Maven or Gradle plugin to manage the contents of an external directory, which will **not be embedded** as a Java resource into the resulting application. 
A user is then responsible for the deployment of such directory. 
Python code will access the files directly from the real filesystem.

Use the following [GraalPyResources](https://github.com/oracle/graalpython/blob/master/graalpython/org.graalvm.python.embedding/src/org/graalvm/python/embedding/utils/GraalPyResources.java) factory methods to create GraalPy Context preconfigured for the use of an external directory:
* `GraalPyResources.createContextBuilder(Path)`

## Conventions

The factory methods in [GraalPyResources](https://github.com/oracle/graalpython/blob/master/graalpython/org.graalvm.python.embedding/src/org/graalvm/python/embedding/utils/GraalPyResources.java) rely on the following conventions, where the `${root}` is either an external directory, or a Virtual System mount point on the Python side and `${project_resources_directory}/org.graalvm.python.vfs` on the real filesystem:
- `${root}/src`: used for Python application files. This directory will be configured as the default search path for Python module files (equivalent to `PYTHONPATH` environment variable).
- `${root}/venv`: used for the Python virtual environment holding installed third-party Python packages. 
The Context will be configured as if it is executed from this virtual environment. Notably packages installed in this
virtual environment will be automatically available for importing.
- `${root}/home`: used for the Python standard library (equivalent to `PYTHONHOME` environment variable).

The Maven or Gradle plugin will fully manage the contents of the `venv` and `home` subdirectories.
Any manual changes in these directories will be overridden by the plugin during the build.
- `${root}/venv`: the plugin creates a virtual environment and installs required packages according to the plugin configuration in _pom.xml_ or _build.gradle_.
- `${root}/home`: the plugin copies the required (also configurable) parts of the Python standard library into this directory.
By default, the full standard library is used.

The _src_ subdirectory is left to be manually populated by the user with custom Python scripts or modules.

## GraalPy Maven Plugin Configuration

Add the plugin configuration in the `configuration` block of `graalpy-maven-plugin` in the _pom.xml_ file:
```xml
<plugin>
    <groupId>org.graalvm.python</groupId>
    <artifactId>graalpy-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    ...
    <configuration>
        ...
    </configuration>
    ...
</plugin>
```
The **packages** element declares a list of third-party Python packages to be downloaded and installed by the plugin.
- The Python packages and their versions are specified as if used with `pip`:
  ```xml
  <configuration>
      <packages>
          <package>termcolor==2.2</package>
          ...
      </packages>
      ...
  </configuration>
  ```
- The **pythonHome** subsection declares what parts of the standard library should be deployed.

  Each `include` and `exclude` element is interpreted as a Java-like regular expression specifying which file paths should be included or excluded.
  ```xml
  <configuration>
      <pythonHome>
          <includes>
              <include>.*</include>
              ...
          </includes>
          <excludes>
              <exclude></exclude>
              ...
          </excludes>
      </pythonHome>
      ...
  </configuration>
  ```
- If the **pythonResourcesDirectory** element is specified, then the given directory is used as an [external directory](#external-directory) and no Java resources are embedded.
Remember to use the appropriate `GraalPyResources` API to create the Context.
  ```xml
  <configuration>
      <pythonResourcesDirectory>${basedir}/python-resources</pythonResourcesDirectory>
      ...
  </configuration>
  ```

## GraalPy Gradle Plugin Configuration

The plugin must be added to the plugins section in the _build.gradle_ file.
The **version** property defines which version of GraalPy to use.
```
plugins {
    // other plugins ...
    id 'org.graalvm.python' version '24.2.0'
}
```

The plugin automatically injects these dependencies of the same version as the plugin version:
  - `org.graalvm.python:python`
  - `org.graalvm.python:python-embedding`

The plugin can be configured in the `graalPy` block:

- The **packages** element declares a list of third-party Python packages to be downloaded and installed by the plugin.
  The Python packages and their versions are specified as if used with `pip`.
  ```
  graalPy {
    packages = ["termcolor==2.2"]
    ...
  }
  ```
- The **pythonHome** subsection declares what parts of the standard library should be deployed.
  Each element in the `includes` and `excludes` list is interpreted as a Java-like regular expression specifying which file paths should be included or excluded.
  ```
  graalPy {
    pythonHome {
      includes = [".*"]
      excludes = []
    }
    ...
  }
  ```
- If the **pythonResourcesDirectory** element is specified, then the given directory is used as an [external directory](#external-directory) and no Java resources are embedded. 
  Remember to use the appropriate `GraalPyResources` API to create the Context.
  ```
  graalPy {
    pythonResourcesDirectory = file("$rootDir/python-resources")
    ...
  }
  ```
- Boolean flag **community** switches the automatically injected
dependency `org.graalvm.python:python` to the community build: `org.graalvm.python:python-community`.
  ```
  graalPy {
    community = true
    ...
  }
  ```

### Related Documentation

* [Embedding Graal languages in Java](https://www.graalvm.org/reference-manual/embed-languages/)
* [Permissions for Python Embeddings](Embedding-Permissions.md)
