docs/user/Jython.md, before:

# Jython Compatibility

Full Jython compatibility is not a goal of this project. One major reason for
this is that most Jython code that uses Java integration will be based on a
stable Jython release, and these only come in Python 2.x versions. The GraalVM
implementation of Python, in contrast, is only targeting Python 3.x.

Nonetheless, there are certain features of Jython's Java integration that we can
offer similarly. Here is an example:

    >>> import java.awt as awt
    >>> win = awt.Frame()
    >>> win.setSize(200, 200)
    >>> win.setTitle("Hello from Python!")
    >>> win.getSize().toString()
    'java.awt.Dimension[width=200,height=200]'
    >>> win.show()

This example works exactly the same on both Jython and Python on GraalVM. Some
features of Jython are more expensive at runtime, and thus are hidden behind a
command line flag on Graal: `--python.EmulateJython`.

### Importing
Import statements allow you to import Java classes, but (unlike Jython), only
packages in the `java` namespace can be directly imported. This will work:
```
import java.lang as lang
```
But this will not:
```
import javax.swing as swing
from javax.swing import *
```
Instead, you will have to import one of the classes you are interested in directly:
```
import javax.swing.Window as Window
```

### Basic Object Usage
Constructing and working with Java objects and classes is done with natural
Python syntax. The methods of Java objects can also be retrieved and passed
around as first class objects (bound to their instance) the same as Python
methods:

    >>> from java.util import Random
    >>> rg = Random(99)
    >>> boundNextInt = rg.nextInt
    >>> rg.nextInt()
    1491444859
    >>> boundNextInt = rg.nextInt
    1672896916

### Java-to-Python Types: Automatic Conversion
Method overloads are resolved by matching the Python arguments in a best-effort
manner to the available parameter types. This is also when data conversion
happens. The goal here is to make using Java from Python as smooth as
possible. The matching we do here is similar to Jython, but Graal Python uses a
more dynamic approach to matching &mdash; Python types emulating `int` or
`float` are also converted to the appropriate Java types. This allows, for
example, to use Pandas frames as `double[][]` or NumPy array elements as `int[]`
when the elements fit into those Java primitive types.

| Java type              | Python type                                                                       |
|:-----------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| null                   | None                                                                              |
| boolean                | bool                                                                              |
| byte, short, int, long | int, any object that has an `__int__` method                                      |
| float                  | float, any object that has a `__float__` method                                   |
| char                   | str of length 1                                                                   |
| java.lang.String       | str                                                                               |
| byte[]                 | bytes, bytearray, wrapped Java array, Python list with only the appropriate types |
| Java arrays            | Wrapped Java array or Python list with only the appropriate types                 |
| Java objects           | Wrapped Java object of the appropriate type                                       |
| java.lang.Object       | Any object                                                                        |

### Special Jython Modules
Any of the special Jython modules are not available. For example, the `jarray`
module on Jython allows construction of primitive Java arrays. This can be
achieved as follows on GraalPython:

    >>> import java
    >>> java.type("int[]")(10)

The code that only needs to pass a Java array can also use Python types. However,
implicitly, this may entail a copy of the array data, which can be deceiving when
using Java arrays as output parameters:

    >>> i = java.io.ByteArrayInputStream(b"foobar")
    >>> buf = [0, 0, 0]
    >>> i.read(buf) # buf is automatically converted to a byte[] array
    3
    >>> buf
    [0, 0, 0] # the converted byte[] array got lost
    >>> jbuf = java.type("byte[]")(3)
    >>> i.read(jbuf)
    3
    >>> jbuf
    [98, 97, 122]

### Exceptions from Java
Catching all kinds of Java exceptions comes with a performance penalty and is
only enabled with the `--python.EmulateJython` flag.

    >>> import java
    >>> v = java.util.Vector()
    >>> try:
    ...    x = v.elementAt(7)
    ... except java.lang.ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException as e:
    ...    print(e.getMessage())
    ...
    7 >= 0

### Java Collections
There is no automatic mapping of the Python syntax for accessing dictionary
elements to the `java.util` mapping and list classes' ` get`, `set`, or `put`
methods. To use these mapping and list clases, you must call the Java methods:

    >>> ht = java.util.Hashtable()
    >>> ht.put("foo", "bar")
    >>> ht.get("foo")
    'bar'

The Python-style iteration of Java `java.util.Enumerable`,
`java.util.Iterator`, or `java.lang.Iterable`  is not supported. For these, you will have to use a
`while` loop and use the `hasNext()` and `next()` (or equivalent) methods.

### No Inheriting from Java
Python classes cannot inherit from Java classes. A workaround can be to create a
flexible subclass in Java, compile it and use delegation instead. Take this
example:
```
import java.util.logging.Handler;

public class PythonHandler extends Handler {
    private final Value pythonDelegate;

    public PythonHandler(Value pythonDelegate) {
        this.pythonDelegate = pythonDelegate;
    }

    public void publish(LogRecord record) {
        pythonDelegate.invokeMember("publish", record);
    }

    public void flush() {
        pythonDelegate.invokeMember("flush");
    }

    public void close() {
        pythonDelegate.invokeMember("close");
    }
}
```
Then you can use it like this in Python:
```
from java.util.logging import LogManager, Logger

class MyHandler():
    def publish(self, logRecord): print("[python]", logRecord.toString())​
    def flush(): pass​
    def close(): pass
​
LogManager.getLogManager().addLogger(Logger('my.python.logger', None, MyHandler()))
```

## Embedding Python into Java

The other way to use Jython is to embed it into Java applications. Where above,
Graal Python offered some measure of compatibility with existing Jython code, we
do not offer any in this case. Existing code using Jython depends directly on
the Jython package (for example, in the Maven configuration), because the Java
code has references to Jython internal classes such as `PythonInterpreter`.

For Graal Python, no dependency other than on the [GraalVM SDK](https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/org.graalvm.sdk/graal-sdk) is
required. There are no APIs particular to Python that are exposed, and
everything is done through the GraalVM API. Important to know is that as long as
your application is executed on a GraalVM with the Python language installed,
you can embed Python in your programs. For more detail, refer to the [Embed Languages](https://www.graalvm.org/reference-manual/embed-languages/) reference.

Commit message:

Fix/clarify Jython compatibility examples
Fixes #158

docs/user/Jython.md, after:

# Jython Compatibility

Full Jython compatibility is not a goal of this project. One major reason for
this is that most Jython code that uses Java integration will be based on a
stable Jython release, and these only come in Python 2.x versions. The GraalVM
implementation of Python, in contrast, is only targeting Python 3.x.

Nonetheless, there are certain features of Jython's Java integration that we can
offer similarly. Here is an example:

    >>> import java.awt as awt
    >>> win = awt.Frame()
    >>> win.setSize(200, 200)
    >>> win.setTitle("Hello from Python!")
    >>> win.getSize().toString()
    'java.awt.Dimension[width=200,height=200]'
    >>> win.show()

This example works exactly the same on both Jython and Python on GraalVM. Some
features of Jython are more expensive at runtime, and thus are hidden behind a
command line flag on Graal: `--python.EmulateJython`.

### Importing
Import statements allow you to import Java classes, but (unlike Jython), only
packages in the `java` namespace can be directly imported. Importing classes
from packages outside `java` namespace also requires the
`--python.EmulateJython` option to be active.
This will work:
```
import java.lang as lang
```
But this will not:
```
import javax.swing as swing
from javax.swing import *
```
Instead, you will have to import one of the classes you are interested in directly:
```
import javax.swing.JWindow as JWindow
```

### Basic Object Usage
Constructing and working with Java objects and classes is done with natural
Python syntax. The methods of Java objects can also be retrieved and passed
around as first class objects (bound to their instance) the same as Python
methods:

    >>> from java.util import Random
    >>> rg = Random(99)
    >>> boundNextInt = rg.nextInt
    >>> rg.nextInt()
    1491444859
    >>> boundNextInt()
    1672896916

### Java-to-Python Types: Automatic Conversion
Method overloads are resolved by matching the Python arguments in a best-effort
manner to the available parameter types. This is also when data conversion
happens. The goal here is to make using Java from Python as smooth as
possible. The matching we do here is similar to Jython, but Graal Python uses a
more dynamic approach to matching &mdash; Python types emulating `int` or
`float` are also converted to the appropriate Java types. This allows, for
example, to use Pandas frames as `double[][]` or NumPy array elements as `int[]`
when the elements fit into those Java primitive types.

| Java type                       | Python type                                                               |
|:--------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `null`                          | `None`                                                                    |
| `boolean`                       | `bool`                                                                    |
| `byte`, `short`, `int` , `long` | `int`, any object that has an `__int__` method                            |
| `float`, `double`               | `float`, any object that has a `__float__` method                         |
| `char`                          | `str` of length 1                                                         |
| `java.lang.String`              | `str`                                                                     |
| `byte[]`                        | `bytes`, `bytearray`, wrapped Java array, Python list with only the appropriate types |
| Java arrays                     | Wrapped Java array or Python list with only the appropriate types         |
| Java objects                    | Wrapped Java object of the appropriate type                               |
| `java.lang.Object`              | Any object                                                                |

### Special Jython Modules
Any of the special Jython modules are not available. For example, the `jarray`
module on Jython allows construction of primitive Java arrays. This can be
achieved as follows on GraalPython:

    >>> import java
    >>> java.type("int[]")(10)

The code that only needs to pass a Java array can also use Python types. However,
implicitly, this may entail a copy of the array data, which can be deceiving when
using Java arrays as output parameters:

    >>> # This example needs the --python.EmulateJython flag for the java.io import
    >>> import java
    >>> i = java.io.ByteArrayInputStream(b"foobar")
    >>> buf = [0, 0, 0]
    >>> i.read(buf) # buf is automatically converted to a byte[] array
    3
    >>> buf
    [0, 0, 0] # the converted byte[] array got lost
    >>> jbuf = java.type("byte[]")(3)
    >>> i.read(jbuf)
    3
    >>> jbuf
    [98, 97, 122]

### Exceptions from Java
Catching all kinds of Java exceptions comes with a performance penalty and is
only enabled with the `--python.EmulateJython` flag.

    >>> import java
    >>> v = java.util.Vector()
    >>> try:
    ...    x = v.elementAt(7)
    ... except java.lang.ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException as e:
    ...    print(e.getMessage())
    ...
    7 >= 0

### Java Collections
There is no automatic mapping of the Python syntax for accessing dictionary
elements to the `java.util` mapping and list classes' ` get`, `set`, or `put`
methods. To use these mapping and list clases, you must call the Java methods:

    >>> # This example needs the --python.EmulateJython flag for the java.util import
    >>> import java
    >>> ht = java.util.Hashtable()
    >>> ht.put("foo", "bar")
    >>> ht.get("foo")
    'bar'

The Python-style iteration of Java `java.util.Enumerable`,
`java.util.Iterator`, or `java.lang.Iterable`  is not supported. For these, you will have to use a
`while` loop and use the `hasNext()` and `next()` (or equivalent) methods.

### No Inheriting from Java
Python classes cannot inherit from Java classes. A workaround can be to create a
flexible subclass in Java, compile it and use delegation instead. Take this
example:
```
import java.util.logging.Handler;

public class PythonHandler extends Handler {
    private final Value pythonDelegate;

    public PythonHandler(Value pythonDelegate) {
        this.pythonDelegate = pythonDelegate;
    }

    public void publish(LogRecord record) {
        pythonDelegate.invokeMember("publish", record);
    }

    public void flush() {
        pythonDelegate.invokeMember("flush");
    }

    public void close() {
        pythonDelegate.invokeMember("close");
    }
}
```
Then you can use it like this in Python:
```
# This example needs the --python.EmulateJython flag for the java.util import
from java.util.logging import LogManager, Logger

class MyHandler():
    def publish(self, logRecord): print("[python]", logRecord.toString())​
    def flush(): pass​
    def close(): pass
​
LogManager.getLogManager().addLogger(Logger('my.python.logger', None, MyHandler()))
```

## Embedding Python into Java

The other way to use Jython is to embed it into Java applications. Where above,
Graal Python offered some measure of compatibility with existing Jython code, we
do not offer any in this case. Existing code using Jython depends directly on
the Jython package (for example, in the Maven configuration), because the Java
code has references to Jython internal classes such as `PythonInterpreter`.

For Graal Python, no dependency other than on the [GraalVM SDK](https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/org.graalvm.sdk/graal-sdk) is
required. There are no APIs particular to Python that are exposed, and
everything is done through the GraalVM API. Important to know is that as long as
your application is executed on a GraalVM with the Python language installed,
you can embed Python in your programs. For more detail, refer to the [Embed Languages](https://www.graalvm.org/reference-manual/embed-languages/) reference.
